the first topic that um we're starting
with today and i'll use that
to then repeat
and and and
come back to a couple of things about
branching and collaborative
workflows that i didn't get to
talk about that detailed yesterday
is publishing data sets so once you have
this data set how can you share your
work with others and that will include a
couple of of technical terms a couple of
concepts um one
are repository hosting services so
web services that offer to host git
repositories such as gitlab github
gin the concept of siblings which is a
remote
clone
of data sets
of a data set that is linked to your
data set that you can either update by
pushing new changes publishing new
changes or update from
by
by pulling or
retrieving changes that your sibling has
but you don't have locally
and a command that is also called data
let push
to do these kinds of updates
um
the idea between behind data lab when it
was first conceived uh i don't know more
than a decade ago was to be able to
share data like source code um so having
a means to
being able to quickly distribute any
kind of data of any size in a
streamlined fashion
um and you've seen
this house
i'm getting some audio feed from someone
i can't identify
can you please mute yourself
okay thanks um so i've shown you this
this overview graphic yesterday already
um
you
are able with git repositories in
general um and there's also data data
sets to have a network of linked data
sets git repositories that can
get updates from each other
or push updates to each other
and
those can exist on compute
infrastructure
such as your local machine
your institution server but also web
services
such as cloud infrastructure
or hosting services such as github
github
or gitlab
um examples of these different um
yeah places
are given in these little code snippets
below just so you have an idea of what
i'm talking about when i when i talk
about local path or remote paths so a
local path could look something like
this
in this case this is a relative path on
a unix-based system you can see that
it's just
a pointer on a file system that
identifies um a directory so this is
unix
speak and says one directory up into the
directory my projects into the directory
experiment data if you have a windows
computer then you will put the slashes
in the opposite direction
um but in general this is this is how a
path looks like it can also be absolute
then it starts with the slash or with
the drive if you are on windows on the
windows you have like a c drive or a d
drive that is at the start on your nexus
unix computers you just have a slash
that identifies the very start of your
file system and then you
chain all of the directories as kind of
a description on how to reach your
target directory and if experiment data
is a data data set then by providing
such a path to the data like clone
command
or a data led create sibling command you
are able to retrieve this data set
as a clone or to publish this data set
as a clone to this local path
there are also remote paths those
are the same concept of paths but they
point to a different system that can be
reached for example via the internet so
if you have a high throughput computing
system a server where your universities
i.t people make computer infrastructure
available to you to store your
experiment data or to run analysis then
you can usually um address this server
with this kind of notation here you have
a username
and then you have this add and then you
have the ip address or a domain name so
a human readable
name that redirects to that ip address
of your hpc system and on that system
that's typically a linux based system
you then
have such a local path that identifies a
data set the directory on the remote
system
when we're talking about hosting
services the
paths or urls rather that are used to
identify
the data sets or the data set um to be
is uh
taking the form of of a url
i will talk a little bit about the
different forms that this url can take
it depends a bit on the protocol that is
used
but
such a github url
might be something that
you have already seen before if you have
ever cloned a git repository
from github where you have a user
account
and then there are also external
so-called special remotes
i'm going to explain that
in a little while
and they
have a special kind of format that you
will not be able to see or you will
probably not have seen that before it's
oftentimes something that we have
established where you just need to read
the documentation and find out what the
right format is um so for example if you
want to talk
to the open science framework with
dataled then you
will use a url with a little bit of a
special format that has an osf for open
science framework prefix and then you
always have project id so these are just
the major you know locations remotely or
locally that we can interact with
um i've also shown you this graphic here
yesterday it kind of exemplifies the
idea that datalet tries to be a
connecting network um that
aims to make life of researchers a
little bit easier
so all of us do research
we create data we we analyze data and so
forth
and all of our work
functions without data led um whatever
you've used to previously share data
with a collaborator it has worked you
know you have your
your means you might send around usb
sticks you might have a google drive to
share stuff you might have a specific
university installed provider that is
paid by a university to
um allocate storage space and cloud
services and so forth
um and and that's that's all
nice and working and datalet tries to be
a little bit of an unobstructive network
that gives you the ability to keep using
the provider that you use anyway
but streamline the commands you use to
retrieve or publish data so if you are
using google drive to to publish or to
share your data
and you decide to use data that then you
can still use that google drive or if
you're an adapt osf user then you can
stay in adapt osf user it's just that
in addition to the usual workflows that
you have
that you have adapted to
you can also
do
data led commands to achieve the same or
a very similar thing
um
and if you you know i can't walk you
through all of the different providers
um
but if you're interested in walkthroughs
tutorials how to use
a large amount of different providers
then you can go to
this link here for party infrastructure
in the handbook it's a complete chapter
and that shows you how to do it within
this free bucket also how to do it with
dropbox and so forth and so forth
so
when we're talking about publication
there are three major
um
locations
uh
yeah
there are three major locations that
that are involved in this process
one the repository hosting services the
major ones that you may have
heard about are github or gitlab and
then there's also something that's
called bitbucket and um this here is jin
we will talk about that
very much today
um
what's also involved are third-party
storage providers those third-party
storage providers are free or commercial
cloud infrastructures that you typically
offer you to host your data in the cloud
so on some server if you are syncing
your android phone's photos with the
google cloud then that's a third-party
storage provider
and then you have the compute
infrastructure that you have access to
so
your local computer your workstation
your desktop computer
or the server that you may have access
on and the question is how can we get
the data set that maybe sits on your
local computer now to be able to
interact with these different locations
and here's a quick glossary
of the things that that i'll i'll be
talking about one is a sibling
a different term for that is also remote
and the sibling or remote is a linked
clone of a data set when you have a
sibling you can add that by hand or it
is added automatically you can update
that siblings changes
or you
can update
the sibling with changes that
your local dataset has but the sibling
doesn't it's a way of synchronizing
across linked across a linked network of
data sets so that's
one thing where there's that's for
example really handy it's a
kind of backup scenario
where you let's say have an ongoing data
acquisition you acquire eeg data and
every day there's a new participant
so the first place where this data
is is appearing is the experiment
computer and then you save it there and
then you synchronize it
with a lot of backup locations for
example
um the cluster the server
or the external hard drive or your own
computer where you might analyze that
data
the repository hosting services the web
services that host git repositories and
because data sets target repositories
awesome data sets
third party storage
i've already given some examples of that
and
a term that i use um
when i talk about third-party storage
providers in the context of datasets is
also special remote
so a special remote
is is a special term it's it's a highly
technical term i don't have a different
term for that um but when i refer to a
special remote i mean
[Music]
a way of communication to a third-party
storage provider that allows me to
deposit data there
the reason why it's called special
remote is that the term remote refers to
any
git repository on a remote location such
as github
but because
third-party storage providers typically
do not have the ability to start target
repositories they are not a hosting
service you can just put all of your
movie movies there all of your pictures
but they do not have support for git
repositories we're calling that special
remote in a way to refer to um to to
using them in a special way that still
allows us
to
to place
contents or completed repositories
on them even though they are not
technically
made with the intention of hosting those
and then repository hosting services
sleep here as a separate category is
is that they are able to talk in
git language so they recognize
repositories they recognize branches
they have the
idea of comets and they are able to
communicate
with git's protocol to transfer
the repository information
the third part third-party storage like
google drive dropbox
s3
do not have this ability
and therefore
a special remote it's a way of it annex
to talk to these places
to send the
data so so to speak in the not git part
yeah exactly
um when i use the term publishing data
sets then
or pushing data sets then
i mean the process of running the
command datalet push
to
[Music]
literally push
any kind of change be that nx contents
or um
changes in my in my git revision history
to
any uh registered sibling to any other
repository and when i use the term
updating data sets then i mean
using a command that is called datalet
update update dash dash merge to
integrate changes that a sibling has
into my local data set and by that you
know getting getting the updates from
from that sibling or pulling the updates
from that zipping if you are using git
it's the same thing as running a git
pull
um
so
when we i need to again give a little
bit of an overview of the different ways
to achieve one and the same thing with
different services uh in data sets so
when we when we take a look at the
infrastructure of services that we
integrate or interact with
then
most public data sets that you are able
to consume
separate
the content that is stored in git and
the content that is stored in the annex
of the data set so this distinction
that exists locally on your data set
that is also upheld in the way these
data sets are
stored or available from other places
and that's because of limitations in the
services that we use
so the repository hosting services that
stargate repositories they typically
don't support
and next contents you've seen that in
this screenshot where i'm trying to you
know
push
a file that's too large in a given
repository to github and you can
immediately see github rejecting that
github does not like to host large data
um and so it also does not have an x
port
what repository hosting services mostly
do is take the get part and host that
really efficiently really nicely and
provide a lot of collaborative
features
and they provide you with the
opportunity to expose your data sets so
that you can go to this publicly
available github gitlab repository and
find a link to clone from which is a
very convenient way for
both you to expose data sets and for
others to find those data sets and
consume them
on the other hand
the storage hosting
services that uh something that nika
already just
explained
they do not have the ability to host the
get part
that conveniently they do not have
the support
the git terminology
um they are simply there to hold digital
blobs of data
and what
happens in the typical case is that the
annexed content the nx part of your data
set that lives on some storage hosting
place
where there is part to simply store
digital blobs and the repository hosting
place that
contains the git part of your data set
and exposes everything
because that sounds like it's a quite
complex operation that involves
synchronizing different elements
different different locations for you as
someone who
[Music]
who maintains that data set
there's something that we call a
publication dependency
which is
the data led way of linking a special
remote so a third-party storage provider
together with the repository hosting
service it's a configuration that you
can apply to let your data set no i want
to have the git part on github i want to
have the nx part in this s3 bucket and
once you have established that
connection
the updating and pulling and pushing
will automatically query both of those
locations so that you still only need to
talk to
um
it seems one place and the synchronizing
of the publication of any large data is
more or less
handled automatically without you having
to you know talk to
these these other services explicitly
so the typical case you have a private
or a public repository on a repository
hosting service
and because the data can't be stored
there it is start in almost any kind of
third-party storage and then you have a
configuration that you run
to tell your repository where to publish
tooth for example d drive for example s3
and once you have set that up
it's uh
either a separate configuration or it is
part of a datalit command then every
datalit push will automatically update
everything that is necessary including
including the
um the data contents
here's how that looks like i'm going to
show you the examples that i've shown
you yesterday and just
talk about um
what's what actually happens in the
background so
um this year was a data set that i've
i've shown you it is a data set that the
lab that i'm a part of has
has published many many years ago you
can clone it from github it's a public
git repository and the data is
completely public so anyone can retrieve
the data
and the data that is part of this
repository
that one is hosted on data pub that
on the server that our institution
provides us with to
to to host data and it is also hosted on
the german neural informatics note and
actually this this data
those data holdings we switched
institutions uh three years ago we used
to be in macbook so initially those data
holdings were hosted on the server in
macbook and then we changed the
institutions and simply um also changed
the the server that held our data but we
were able to just update the location
information of those data sets so that
the get will still retrieve the data
even though the underlying hosting
has changed
the
next example was how we handle
large neuroscientific data sets that
require a data usage agreement that our
data manager in our institute downloads
first and then provides for the
researchers to
to download and use
we have a private gitlab instance so
only institute members can accept access
that gitlab instance
and if they can
then they can clone
the
data set that holds all of the data
but only onto
the cluster because the data because it
needs to be kept private cannot be
publicly exposed
is hosted on our private servers and
only accessible to institute members so
as long as i'm on our compute server i
am able to get those files those data
sets if i'm on my local computer i do
not have the required permissions um to
to retrieve them
and then the next real life example
and that's the human connectom project
if you've used if you've worked with
that data you know that the human
connector project requires you to read a
license and and
you know sign that you adhere to their
data usage agreement
and their data is hosted on s3 buckets
and
with data led you can clone this data
set and once you want to retrieve data
you will be asked for your credentials
that
assert that you have actually signed
this doa the u d u r a and once once
those credentials are provided uh you
will be able to download the data so
that's like a mix uh it's prince and
principle available to the public but
only if you know you have the
the signed data usage agreement
um there is a special case in publishing
and that's a really really wonderful
thing
there are certain repository hosting
services that actually do have an export
and don't require the separation of your
data set contents and the git parts of
your data set
and
the one that
will be also using later today is called
jing i've asked you in this little
participant survey on whether this is a
service that's no to you and most people
have indicated that they've never heard
of it so i'm quite glad that i can
provide you with um with this piece of
information about the service because i
think it's it's a really cool it's a
really cool service
it's the
um german neuro informatics note that
is
uh creating a little bit of a german
github
what makes jin
special is that it has nx support
and thus
can hold the nx data
in addition to the get part of your
repository and it exposes the git
history but also all of the annexed
files including
a nice little web-based preview
of those files and importantly it's
completely free it's an academic
infrastructure that the university of
munich provides
a different special case are special
remotes that party
storages that have support
for repository hosting
and that's
typically not implemented in those
places so the way that we make this work
is by writing special software
that that
that makes it possible
so
in the case of the open science
framework
we have created what is called a data
extension a data extension is a separate
python software so we have the data led
car repository or the data
core
package that's what you've all
installed and what is on the on the
system but for special
purpose software for special purpose
commands we create separate python
packages that add additional
commands to data let's command suit
those are
not
you know
those may be might be special use cases
so for example not everyone uses the
open science framework
so it's just a separate installation
such that those people that want to use
the open science framework can download
that separately to extend the commands
the datalit can do and what the what the
so-called data led osf extension adds to
datalit are commands to publish the
dataset including the git history and
the nx contents to the osf and cloning
from the osf with this special url that
i've already
briefly shown you
here's a quick i hope this is visible in
the screen share it's just a gif
so here's how it would look like
publishing to a git repository hosting
service with annex support you can see
here that i've created a little data set
and i'm currently adding a file from the
web and saving it
and if i go to to jin and create a new
repository and add it as a sibling
dataset as a remote that i can push
these updates to
then because
jin is capable of also hosting the
annexed contents i can run a data lab
push command without any further
configuration of additional third party
hosting services and data led push
will
push everything and if i go to the web
interface i can even have a preview of
those annexed contents in the web
interface that's quite neat
for the osf it looks uh different
but similar
if i install the required python package
data lit osf i can use datalet create
sibling osf with a title
for that new project on osf
and what um datalit will do it will
create under my user account uh that if
it doesn't have the user account it will
ask for it from the command line this
new project and if i then run data at
push to that sibling i will be able to
um update that osf project with all of
the local changes that i have including
the um annexed files
that can be hosted on the osf
um the only
inconvenience there is that the osf is
limited in the amount of data it can
host for you so you won't be able to
publish like a complete
a complete nor imaging study there
um
and then if that is published i can you
know refresh that project
and it will
contain the file content i see a raised
hand
i just have one question for that so
when you um
so
the history of your changes like on osf
will
not appear
on the osf right no no you don't have
this like overview
um
yeah you probably don't want that
it's just that they don't support um
displaying it
but if you yeah you also don't i mean
maybe you want to end up with a finished
product and not the entire history right
oh yeah and i mean also that's that's
that's possible um so i i need to refer
you to the to the documentation of that
software um
and that one has has tutorials it has
different modes
because you you are able to to use the
osf in in a way that allows you to not
publish all of the history but just
create a snapshot of the most recent
file state and then push that there and
i think that's that's the use case too
export a human readable data set to the
osf and and that gives you the commands
to create the sibling and then
it it has this mode that is called
export only and when you when you run
that or when you use that instead of the
default mode
then it will just update the upload the
most recent snapshot
so that's when you don't want the
history at all
i think
i see another raised hand but in other
words the cost of history will not be
the git history though also history will
be
today
data deposited some things
that actually in its own way
and i have a question about gin does it
basically like um like github but it
also supports big files i assume
and
does it support private repositories
because i mean a really cool thing uh
just during
as an additional backup it sounds really
cool it does okay it's awesome it does
um
yeah and then there's another special
case uh that's not going to be
applicable to many people but in the
case you want to have like if you if you
want to be a data provider
then something that i want to draw your
attention to is what is called reasource
this is a highly technical um concept
it's our backup solution
for data sets that has
a number of advantages that will sound
pretty technical but it's something that
you could
that you could excite your system
administrator with for example it's
essentially a very lightweight
way without
almost any software dependencies to
store large amounts of data sets in very
few
files so systems uh there are file
systems um or services that uh charge
you for the amount of files that are
stored on the system that's called
inodes if you have such a system then
you are incentivized to keep the number
of files that you store they're pretty
small
real store would for example allow you
to represent a data set with any amount
of files and
any size any total disk usage size
in just about 25 files um
it's something that we base a lot of
computing on our in our institute on
but it may not be you know the
kind of thing that you're looking for if
you just want to use it
for yourself
but if you're interested in it then
there's a tutorial that you know takes
you through the process of creating
these things or interacting with these
things
freely available on github
um datalot 016 so the most recent
version comes
with a number of integrations of
convenience commands that allow you to
not leave your terminal
in order to create a sibling
it's completely up to you whether you
want to leave your terminal you know
some people like to use the web
interface also the repository hosting
services they make it really easy and
convenient and nice so if you if you
want to use those it's not a problem but
there are some people that that do not
want to leave the terminal that often
want to do everything from the command
line and there are a couple of
convenience commands you've seen me use
them in the in the gifts that i've
included in the slides
to create the siblings automatically
those commands are create sibling github
to create a github repository creates a
blinkit lab for gitlab creates a blink
gin for gin
creates a blink gox for any gox instance
gox is basically
an open source version of github that
you can host yourself
then
there's the data that create sibling
command that allows you to create
siblings on your local computer for on
local paths or on remote infrastructure
such as your server so you can say data
like create sibling my username at my
server and then it will create a
repository or a data set
there
real stores have one called data that
creates sibling via and the open science
framework has a special command that you
get
if you install data let osf with a
package manager such as conda or pip and
that's called data let create sibling
over there
and there are a lot of other services
that we're working on um we're a fairly
small team of people so if you have a
service that you are really interested
in using and let us know because then it
might help us prioritize
those things
i'm really exciting um piece that is
currently being worked on this web dev
that includes for example skibo
accounts and i think we're in the works
of basically a publish to anywhere
command where you can just
you know give a url to any kind of place
on the web and it will it will try its
best to create a dataset sibling there
um but those are all in the works and if
you have something that you want to see
supported then get in touch
so
just as one last
overview of how
the
process looks like from a consumer
perspective
depending on where you obtain those data
sets from when you have a local path on
the very same machine then you just say
data let clone
path to my data set and then data like
get retrieves those
files that are annexed automatically
from the local part that's a really fast
operation that's useful for example if
you have data sets on your
shared infrastructure that a lot of
people have access to
in a central location
if you clone from a server or a compute
cluster then you don't use the local
path but you use the remote path that
includes your username and the ip
address the domain name of the server
that you're talking to as well as the
path of the data set and the data let
get will then retrieve those nx contents
via network via via the internet from
from that server
typically that is
via something that's called an ssh
community
if you clone from a repository hosting
service on the web then you take the url
that is provided by the repository
hosting service
when you click on that little button
clone this repository
and
clone that as a sibling to your local
computer
and then data light get will retrieve
the annexed files
more or less regardless of where they
are stored as long as you have access to
them and that can be the original
location it can be a special remote that
was configured
it may need additional configuration by
either the user or the data set provider
or it may ask you for authentication so
that it can make sure that you know the
um let's say s3 bucket that you want to
access
is actually open to you as a specific
user so that's highly dependent on what
what what special remote is storing the
data
but
[Music]
pretty much regardless of which one it
is it's still the data.get command it
just maybe that you know
it says hey this this is actually not
not available to the public
please provide your username and your
password in order to let me check if you
have access to the files that i want to
get
in the special cases that i've already
mentioned here for example jyn
here's how cloning looks like
you can see in the screenshot that i'm
doing it from the from from our compute
cluster
um to have a different computer clone
that data set you can see that i've
copied the url of that repository and i
cloned it and then i can get the files
and it is retrieved from its origin from
from jin
if i do it with the osf
i need to provide a special type of url
that is starting with the osf
colon slash slash and then includes the
id the unique id of the project that i
want to clone
and here i'm providing also a human
readable name for the sibling up for the
clone that i'm that i'm creating because
as it would be called
6v2 hp
and it uh clones the dataset from the
osf it looks just like a normal dataset
once i've cloned it and if i retrieve
the file contents that are annexed in
this data set they are downloaded they
are retrieved um from the osf because
that's a you know a public project
there's nothing that that needs to be
authenticated against
um so
the the summary the quick brief summary
and data publication is
uh
first of all uh in case there's a fire
in your building and you're working on
your stuff and you have everything saved
the very first thing that you run is
data like push to whatever sibling there
is so that
you evacuate yourself but you also
evacuate your data by keeping the backup
on a remote sibling sync
um
so to to to to to yet to summarize the
main points data let data sets can have
any number of siblings those are linked
clones of the very same data set that
exist in other places
and they can be locally or remotely
on
computer infrastructure they can be on
commercial services
google drive dropbox on free services
there's people
on personal infrastructure in case you
happen to have a web server in your
basement
um typical repository hosting services
do not host annex content stim is one
notable exception
and typical storage providers on the
other hand do not host git repositories
even though we can trick some storage
providers into hosting
them for us
and despite all of those different
possible services that are involved in
this process of publishing data sets
getting their contents out there the
operations that you perform are pretty
much streamlined you clone from
somewhere to retrieve a data set you get
annexed file contents to download them
you push
to a remote location to publish data
sets or new changes in data sets and you
update in order to pull remote changes
into your local data set and this
remains the case even if the underlying
data hosting changes so if you are going
to get a call from another university
you're going to get tenure at the
university of berlin you're going to
start your postdoc in the uk
and you are forced by the university's
it services to take all of your
belongings data wise from their
infrastructure and take it with you to a
different place then just by
providing your data set with the updated
availability information
and and pushing that to let's say the
github repository which you use to to
share that data you are able to to to
provide your data
to your data consumers or to yourself
by the same means by the same streamline
commands even though the hosting
services change underneath that's uh
probably especially useful if you are
like a large data provider
um who might frequently switch to you
know cheaper clouds
services and stuff but it's also useful
for you as as
you know part of a group of people that
are forced to
uh relocate
to different universities over the
course of their careers
and their data and their results being
their most valuable asset
and these siblings they can serve
multiple purposes
one of the three major ones are personal
backups uh i think lucas was it who
already um
brought that up it's really nice to have
this connected network of of data sets
that you can just easily sync
because you're able to work on different
systems you are able to to to keep your
data safe
um for example engine
you can
uh use siblings to publicly or privately
expose files that you want to share or
collaborate with selected others for
these cases um it's especially useful
that a lot of those repository services
have private options so that you can
have a private repository that only
selected few your immediate
collaborators your colleagues
have access to
and they serve as entry points for
collaborations for the contributions
that other people may have to your data
sets